Fisseha Berhane, PhD 

Data Scientist at Aurotech  

Phone: 443-970-2353         Website: http://datascience-enthusiast.com/ 

                     Email:  fisseha@jhu.edu     Regular writer for DataScience+ and R-bloggers 

Current Employment 

 

Data Scientist at Aurotech                                                                                    Sep 2015-   
 
Solving various problems using data analytics and machine learning with Spark, R, Python, 
Hadoop ecosystem, and Tableau. 

Projects: 

  Hadoop Data  Lake for analytics and machine learning with big data 

  Created a Hadoop cluster on AWS EC2 
  Ingested desperate data from various sources and in different      

formats to the lake     

  Cleaned and transformed the data for downstream analytics pipeline 
  Developed machine learning applications using Spark’s MLlib library 
  Connected Tableau with the data lake and created visualizations using 

Spark SQL with ODBC connector.            

  Predicting drug recall potential using various machine learning techniques and various 

 

data sources 
Architecture diagram available here 
Interactive drug adverse event knowledge discovery with R and Shiny using 
unsupervised machine learning techniques 
Cleaned and merged lots of adverse event datasets and stored them in a database. 
Developed an R-shiny application that clusters (using optics and hierarchical clustering) 
drug adverse events to discover new insights interactively 
Architecture diagram available here 

  Real-time tracking of disease outbreaks using social media with R and Tableau 

Created a complete pipeline that automates social media data collection, cleaning and 
processing, sentiment analysis, trend analysis and creates a Tableau dashboard. 
Architecture diagram available here 

  R-Shiny dashboard API that helps to download the FDA adverse events data 

Created an API that helps users to download data based on search query from the FDA 
adverse events database 

  Social media mining to track natural hazards at real-time 
Created a Tableau dashboard that helps to track flooding 

  Google Trends Analytics with R-Shiny 

Created an R shiny application that closely listens to google search trends and identifies 
anomalies in disease related google searches.  

 

1 

Education 

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 

Ph.D., Earth and Planetary Sciences,                                                                 2016 

            Thesis: Intraseasonal precipitation variability over tropical Africa 
           Advisor: Benjamin F. Zaitchik 

M.A., Earth and Planetary Sciences                                                              May 2013 

University of Connecticut 

M.S., Natural Resources and the Environment,                                            May 2011  

   Thesis: Model based assessment of potential impacts of climate change on the flow of 
 
 
    Advisor: Richard Anyah 

 the main headwaters of the Nile River: Equatorial Lakes Region and Blue Nile 
 Basins        

 
 

 
 

Mekelle University, Ethiopia 

B.Sc., Civil Engineering,                                                                                      June 2006  
 

Research Positions 

Graduate Research Assistant, Department of Earth and Planetary Science, Johns Hopkins 

University, Baltimore, Maryland.                                                                    August 2011 – 2015 

 

 Built semi-automated rainfall prediction models, with various machine learning 
techniques such as Tree-based ensemble models (Random Forest and Boosting), 
Support vector Machines and Artificial Neural Network, with R, HTML, 
JavaScript, and CSS. 

  Employed various statistical analysis and data mining techniques using Python 

and R to understand interactions of atmospheric waves and their impacts on 
rainfall using large volume climate data. 

  Analyzed large volume climate data, using Python and R, to investigate future 

climate conditions  

  Completed many side-projects on big data using Spark (e.g., movie 

recommendation, web server log analysis, text mining and entity resolution and 
click-through prediction; available on my website) 

  Worked on many other side-projects using R (available on my website) 
 

In addition to the data science courses I have done in grad school, I have taken 
more than 20 edx, coursera and Udacity data science courses with R, Spark, 
Python, Matlab, and Hadoop and MapReduce (certificates on my website) 

 
Graduate Research Assistant, Department of Natural Resources and the Environment, 

University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT                                                             2009 – May 2011 

 

 Built and evaluated a model that predicts Nile River flow. Further, examined 
possible impacts of climate change on river flow using different climate scenarios. 

  The main tools I used in this study: R, Python and GIS. 

 

 

2 

Awards 

Research Assistantship, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 

Baltimore, Maryland                                                                                           2012-2015 

Morton K. Blaustein Fellowship, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins 

University, Baltimore, Maryland                                                                        2011-2012 

Research Assistantship, Department of Natural of Resources and the Environment, University of 

Connecticut, Storrs, CT                                                                                        2009-2011 

 
Teaching Experience 

Teaching assistant (TA), Department of Earth and Planetary Science, The Johns Hopkins 

University, Baltimore, Maryland.                                                                             Spring 2013 

Assistant Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Mekelle University, Ethiopia   2006-2009      
 
Peer-Reviewed publications  

Berhane F and BF Zaitchik: An MJO-mediated mechanism to explain ENSO and IOD impacts on 

East African short rains. in prep. 

Berhane F, BF Zaitchik and HS Badr, 2015: The Madden-Julian Oscillation's influence on Spring 

Precipitation over Equatorial West Africa. J. Climate. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-
D-14-00510.1. 

Berhane F and BF Zaitchik, 2014: Modulation of Daily Precipitation over East Africa by the 

Madden–Julian Oscillation. J. Climate, 27(15): 6016-6034. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-13-00693.1. 

Berhane F, BF Zaitchik and A Dezfuli, 2013: Sub-seasonal analysis of precipitation variability in 
the Blue Nile River basin. J. Climate, 27(1): 325-344. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-
D-13-00094.1. 

 
 
 
 
 
Data Science related courses I have done  

 
Graduate  

o  Time Series Analysis 
o  Statistical Computing 
o  Data Analytics for Engineering, Policy Analysis and Management 
o 
o  Spatial Statistics and Modelling 
o  Environmental Quantitative Methods 
o  Python Scripting for GIS 

Inversion Modeling & Data Assimilation 

 

3 

   

Undergraduate  

o  Probability and Statistics 
o  Computer Programming (C++) 
o  Applied Mathematics I 
o  Applied Mathematics II 
o  Numerical Methods 

 

             Online (Coursera, edx, Udacity; certificates linked) 

Intro to Data Science 

o  Machine Learning 
o  BerkeleyX: CS100.1x Intro to Big Data with Apache Spark 
o  MITx - 6.00.1x Intro to Computer Science and Programming Using Python 
o  Practical Machine Learning 
o  BerkeleyX: CS190.1x Scalable Machine Learning 
o  Developing Data products 
o 
o  DAT201x: Querying with Transact-SQL 
o  R Programming  
o  Reproducible Research 
o  The Data Scientist’s Toolbox 
o  Getting and Cleaning Data 
o  Regression Models 
o  MITx: 15.071x The Analytics Edge 
o  W3C-HTML5 
o  Statistical Inference 
o    Exploratory Data Analysis 
o 
o  Text Mining, Scarping and Sentiment Analysis with R 
o  Tableau 9 For Data Science: Real-Life Data Science Exercise 
o  Tableau 9 Advanced Training: Master Tableau for Data Science 

Intro to Hadoop and MapReduce 

 

Other Skills 

  Operating Systems: Windows , Unix and Linux 
  Software:  Python, R, Apache Spark, Tableau, Hadoop, SQL, Matlab, C++,  Octave, 
GRADS, Ferret, NCL, WRF, ArcGIS, SWAT, ERDAS IMAGINE, ENVI, RegCM, Fortran, 
HTML5, JavaScript, CSS, Git 

Selected Presentations 
Berhane F and BF Zaitchik, 2015: The influence of the MJO on Spring Equatorial West African 
convection. 95th AMS Annual Meeting 2015, Sixth Conference on Weather, Climate, and 
the New Energy Economy, Phoenix, AZ. 

 

4 

Berhane F and BF Zaitchik, 2014: Intraseasonal variability of the impacts of the Madden-Julian 
Oscillation on East African long and short rains. 94th AMS Annual Meeting 2014, Second 
Symposium on Prediction of the Madden-Julian Oscillation: Impacts on Weather and 
Climate Extremes, Atlanta, GA. 

Berhane F and BF Zaitchik, 2014: Intraseasonal variability of the impacts of the Madden-Julian 

Oscillation in the Gulf of Guinea. 94th AMS Annual Meeting 2014, Fifth Conference on 
Weather, Climate, and the New Energy Economy, Atlanta, GA. 

Berhane F, BF Zaitchik and A Dezfuli, 2013: Evolution of intraseasonal precipitation variability in 

the Blue Nile River basin. 93rd AMS Annual Meeting 2013, 25th Conference on Climate 
Variability and Change, Austin, Texas, USA. 

Berhane F, 2013: Modulation of daily rainfall over Africa by the Madden-Julian oscillation. 5th 

annual Atmosphere-Ocean Science Days seminar, Department of Earth and Planetary 
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 

Berhane F, 2013: Intraseasonal variability of the modulation of daily rainfall over Africa by the 

Madden-Julian oscillation. Atmosphere-Ocean Seminar. Department of Earth and 
Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 

Berhane F, 2013: Modulation of daily rainfall over Africa by the Madden-Julian oscillation. 
Journal Club, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland 

Berhane F, 2012: Intraseasonal variability of precipitation in the Blue Nile River Basin. Climate 

Dynamics of Tropical Africa: Present Understanding and Future Directions, Department of 
Earth and Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 

Berhane F, 2012: Rainfall anomalies in the Blue Nile basin and their teleconnections with the 

Indian Summer Monsoon. Journal Club, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 

Berhane F, 2012: Evolution of drivers and mechanisms of precipitation variability in the Blue 

Nile River Basin. Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office- Nile Basin Initiative. Addis Ababa, 
August 2012. 

Berhane F, 2012: Model based assessment of potential impacts of climate change on the flow 
of the Blue Nile Basin. Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office- Nile Basin Initiative. Addis 
Ababa, August 2012. 

Berhane F,  Anyah R.O., 2010: Hydrological Response to Climate Change over the Blue Nile 
Basin Distributed hydrological modeling based on surrogate climate change scenarios. 
American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting 20140, San Francisco, California, USA. 

 

 
Professional Memberships 

Member of American Meteorological Society 
Member of American Geophysical Union     

 

5 

 

 

6 

